You have to understand how Trump
diplomacy works and people [music]
particularly on the left don't
understand is it's functional for
President Trump to have open lines with
Xiinping. They are part of the world
stage. [music] You have to negotiate.
>> Peter Navaro, economist, White House
trade adviser and the man who went to
jail for President Trump.
>> This morning I did walk out of a federal
prison. Who would you trust to continue
this agenda?
>> You got JD Vance is the vice president
and Marco Rubio. That would be a great
ticket
>> from [music] Bloomberg Weekend. This is
the Michelle Hussein show.
[music] The Trump administration has
delivered a dramatic start to the new
year in geopolitics.
first seizing Nicholas Maduro and saying
that it's going to be running Venezuela
and then talking again about acquiring
Greenland, which is part of Denmark, a
NATO ally. Given Greenland's minerals
and Venezuela's oil, all of this is
another demonstration of just how
acutely aligned US trade policy and US
foreign policy now are. But there is an
important potential development in the
trade story that could be a problem for
the US government at home. The Supreme
Court is expected to rule soon in a
significant case about the tariffs
imposed last year. And if that case
doesn't go the White House's way, there
will be considerable implications.
So keep that in mind as you listen to
this conversation with Peter Navaro, the
man who has probably influenced the
president on tariffs more than anyone
else. We spoke in Washington before the
Venezuelan news, but the way Navaro sees
the world is a critical insight into the
way the Trump inner circle thinks and
why.
>> Dr. Navaro, welcome. Thanks for being
with us.
>> Great to be with you. I wondered if we
could start with the origins of your
bond with the president. When did you
meet him for the first time?
>> It goes back to
when I wrote the first book in what
would be the my China trilogy. This was
a book called The Coming China Wars.
And at the time it was widely viewed as
hyperbole.
Right now it reads like a government
report. Basically based on my research I
had parsed the Chinese economic model.
The the prevailing view in the early
2000s
as China had joined the World Trade
Organization was beginning to inundate
the world with their dumped manufactured
products was that it was simply cheap
labor.
And what my analysis showed that was a
lot more than that. Things I would
eventually call the seven deadly
merkantilista sins, which is to say that
China set about taking the world apart
using things like high government
subsidies,
uh, intellectual property theft,
>> unfair trading practices,
>> piracy,
>> the whole stateowned enterprise, the
whole gamut. So I had spent several
years doing research on that, published
the coming China wars. And then in 2011,
President Trump was doing an interview
and they asked him what his favorite
books on China were and mine was uh on
the list. So I sent him a note of thanks
and we exchanged correspondences.
He always like sends you letters and you
there'll be type letters but he'll
always put a handwritten note in it and
that how that how that began and when he
went down the escalator with Melania and
declared I sent him a note say hey you
need anything and they called me in
2016.
Uh, I was supposed to go out to New York
just for a couple of days and I
[laughter] I meet him there. It was It
was pretty funny. I get into this black
SUV in the back seat, right? And we're
getting ready to go to the airport
and get in his plane uh to go to a
rally. Okay. Famous rallies. And he gets
in the front seat and he he's going,
"Hey, Rupert, what's going on?" And it's
like he's he's talking to Murdoch. And
then he hangs up and and then he he
looks at back and he goes, "Who's that?"
Because he'd never seen me before. And I
introduced myself. And that's kind of
how it happened. Very kind.
>> You bonded over China essentially, your
views on China. And then China became a
big rallying point for him in his first
run for the White House. I want to
understand something about how your
views evolved because you used to be a
Democrat, right? You used to talk about
how bad protectionism would be not only
for the US but the global economy.
>> Well, you're you're conflating a few
things here because historically
Democrats were the ones who were
protectionists who were in favor of
basically defending the American working
class against unfair trade. And we have
in our history of this republic a very
long history of defending our
manufacturing base. If you go back to
Alexander Hamilton, first Treasury
Secretary, uh he wrote a a very stunning
book about manufacturing and the need to
protect it. Lincoln was a tariff man.
McKinley was a tariff man. Henry Clay
was a tariff man. I mean, all of these
famous figures up until 1913,
the United States actually funded its
government entirely through tariff
revenues. I don't know if you knew that.
And then we had passed the income tax
and kind of shifted away from that. And
one of the running jokes the boss and I
have is like, who figured the the China
thing out first? And and of course he
did because if you go back there's a
famous interview with him and Oprah
Winfrey back in the 80s and he wasn't
talking about China but he was talking
about Japan and how they were taking us
apart with unfair trade and everything
he said back then would then fit the
China model. Now with respect to my
evolution of thought, my first exposure
to kind of the Chinese economic model
was when I was in the Peace Corps in
Thailand. And what was fascinating to me
is that virtually everywhere you went in
Asia, the commerce was run by Chinese.
>> Even then, it's before China joined the
W.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Well, this was Chinese
diaspora. So you fast forward to I'm
teaching at the University of California
Irvine business students who are fully
employed, right? They come at night and
on the weekends and I'm noticing they're
losing their jobs. I'm thinking what's
going on here? And this was circa 2003
and curiously two years after China
joined the World Trade Organization. So
I looked into this and it's like all
roads led to Beijing. I do the research
project and I realize, hey, this is
cheating. It's devastating our
manufacturing base and I would continue
that research.
>> So, bring us up to the present day then
because you were at President Trump's
side in the first term. You went to jail
for him.
>> So, to be clear, I went to prison in
defense of the Constitution, the
constitutional separation of powers.
Basically, what Congress did in the wake
of the January 6th riots on Capitol Hill
was engaged in a partisan effort to
unseat the president and make sure he
never ran for office again. I wonder how
much it changed you because I'm struck
reading your account of your prison
days. How much you notice and document
all the small pettiness really the
meanness
>> that you see around you? The withholding
of medicines, the lack of fresh fruit
and vegetables. Did you see a different
America which has informed your
politics?
>> No. No. I I grew up poor. I grew up in
that mill. I just And it prison didn't
change me at all. I changed prison. I
changed that place. I changed the
system. I went in there uh to defend the
Constitution uh on principle. And
instead of uh crying in my beer, uh I
turned myself into an investigative
reporter. I uncovered a $5 billion
scandal. And since I've been out, I've
solved that scandal. And that's that's a
pretty good achievement. So prison
didn't change me. I changed it. And now
you've been his trade counselor and
adviser through through this period.
How's the relationship with the US and
China on trade going now? Help us
understand it.
>> Look, it's a work in progress the
relationship with China. I am a veteran
of the first term. Um, I spent
months and months and months with then
United States Trade Representative
Robert Lighheiser, one of the great
American patriots and thinkers in this
country. And we negotiated with the
Chinese a very very comprehensive
>> trade deal. It was an amazing thing that
would have been really good for China as
well as the United States because it
would have completely reformed Chinese
model and they agreed to it and then at
the last minute
Xiinping
said no. Okay. So that was that's like
really important to understand like we
went for a long over a year negotiating
what would have been a perfect deal and
then at the end they backed out on that
and then we then we signed what was
called the skinny deal
and that was in January of 2020 the last
year the Trump administration and they
didn't abide by that. So the problem
that we always face with China is that
you always kind of wonder
whether they're just stretching you out
whether even if you sign a deal they're
going to retrade it
>> and you're you're part of the US
administration which is why I want to
understand what the actions currently
are. For example, President Trump meets
Cinping and essentially you end up with
a deal which lowers some tariffs and
which suspends heightened tariffs. So,
there's effectively a year-long trade
truce. Is that keeping with your mission
to avoid death by China?
>> So, uh you're burying the lead here.
What's the current tariff rate now?
Well, the ones I'm referring to are the
the lowering of some of the
>> But what's the current rate after
they've been lowered?
>> Well, it's 10% on some things, right?
>> The total total tariff on China
>> is almost 50%. Okay, let me say that one
more time. It's almost 50%. So when you
say that we lowered the rates, we only
lowered them down to 45%. We took on
Chinese imports imposed to curb fentinel
flows and and there was a suspension
reciprocal tariffs.
>> You have to understand there was a
baseline tariff because of the section
301 actions in the first term. One of
the few things Joe Biden kept that we
added the reciprocal tariff to which is
still in place and a 20% fentanel tariff
which we only lowered by 10%. So those
are robust tariffs on China. And in
fact, we are strongly encouraging Europe
to adopt exactly the same level of
tariffs that we adopt for the simple
reason that when the president puts up
tariffs to defend America from Chinese
cheating.
>> China can't sell as much here, where
does it sell it? Dumps it in Europe.
Dumps it in Mexico. Now, as we are
talking just in the recent news,
Mexico did exactly what I'm suggesting,
did so at the urging of our trade team,
which is to say the Senate in Mexico
passed 50% tariffs on China. And they
did it because China was dumping goods
which would otherwise go into America.
And Europe should follow the US and
Mexican lead. And they are doing that.
They're doing that in steel. And I see
that that's the interest on
[clears throat] other countries. But I'm
sure that you can see why looking at the
USChina relationship,
>> one can see the contrast between when
President Trump first arrived and we end
up with a meeting after which he talks
about having enormous respect between
the two countries and how honored he is
that President C has has authorized the
purchase of soybeans and other goods. So
that there is a softening.
>> No, there's no softening. How is that
understanding how Trump diplomacy works?
And the great the great thing that that
people particularly on the left don't
understand is that it's functional for
President Trump to have open lines with
Xiinping,
Vladimir Putin, Erdogan in Turkey, uh
all of the people [clears throat] that
uh the world regards as vicious
dictators, which they are, but they are
part of the world stage where You have
to negotiate.
>> You have him saying enormous respect for
China. That's what he's talking about.
Do you have enormous respect for China?
>> I have enormous respect for the Chinese
people. Okay. The Chinese people are
under the boot of Chinese Communist
Party. If China is going to escape its
own merkantalist economic model which is
screwing the world including Europe and
causing tremendous instability in the
financial system and and and great uh
anger towards China. It needs to do one
simple thing. It needs to lower
the savings rate in China by providing a
social safety net for its people. It's
extraordinary that a communist socialist
country has no protections with respect
to pensions
or healthcare
for its people. That's extraordinary.
And instead, what the Chinese do because
that's the way they roll is they let the
Communist Party members become rich.
They let a smaller slice of the
entrepreneurial class become rich
>> and I know
>> and then everybody else
>> I know how strongly you feel about this.
You've written about it in successive
books. I wonder if there are other
people who would prioritize doing
business with China who have influence
over the president in a way that makes
you less than comfortable. Jensen has
managed to get Nvidia H200 chips being
sold to China. Are you comfortable with
that?
>> That's a that's a work in progress.
That's an ongoing dialogue. I I think
people have to understand that that
there's a constant negotiation going on
with with countries around the world. I
mean, and and the China relationship is
a very difficult one. And I I think you
left out the part about how China has
weaponized rare earth's critical
minerals, which are a critical part of
virtually every high technology product
that's made around the world. And China
has been flexing its muscles now in
Europe, in India, in the United States,
saying basically, we're going to do what
we want and if you try to stop us, we're
going to take away your critical
minerals because they have they think
they have a monopoly on it. But that's
just a matter of time. American
innovation is going to quickly wipe away
that weaponization. So what do you do in
the meantime? You do diplomacy.
And if people want to call that soft,
then they don't understand the
chessboard.
>> So are you comfortable with China being
able to buy Nvidia's? No, that
specifically about the next generation
AI
>> chips not my lane. Okay. I
>> except it enables a lot of competition
then with US AI companies.
>> Let me let your viewers know this. I'm
one of only three people who
served as a senior adviser in the first
Trump administration from the beginning
to the end. That happened because I stay
in my lane and chips are not my lane.
>> Yeah. But I I know from one of your
books, Taking Back Trump's America, that
you you know exactly what it's like to
be part of an administration where
different people have influence and how
you worry about losing sight of a core
agenda essentially that people need to
remember about delivering for
workingclass Americans. So are there
risks to the American people not
understanding the agenda that you're
trying to deliver now that we're in the
runup to the midterms? Of
>> course. And part of my job is to explain
exactly
what we've inherited, which is a mess,
>> how we're addressing it,
and how long it's going to take to see
the fruits of the Trump policies. The
model here,
>> how long do you think it's going to
take? Well, the model here is the
transition from Jimmy Carter in the 70s
era of stagflation to the presidency of
Ronald Reagan. And Carter, much like uh
Biden, Harris, created a tremendous
problem with both inflation and
recession because of their policies. If
you think about what Biden set us up
for, um, it's it was it was a
stagflationary scenario. So Carter did
the same for Reagan. So Reagan comes in,
does the deregulation,
positive supply shock, does the tax
cuts, positive supply shock, makes makes
adjustments, stops doing stupid stuff
like Carter did. But it takes time. And
for Reagan, the time ran out because by
the time the midterms rolled around, two
years after he t assumed office, it was
a bloodbath and the Democrats won the
House and basically paralyzed
government. But the next six years were
a beautiful thing because Reagan's
policies took hold and we had one of the
most prosperous times. Now, we
understand that history and we're trying
to make sure we don't get caught in that
same vice. So, what we have to do is
explain very clearly the American
people. Let me give you two examples.
>> Wait, I I do want to ask you this this
point about the time frame. So, work in
progress. You need to convince Americans
and work hard on that. 2028 in that
election. Who would you trust to
continue this agenda?
>> It's not for me to say and it's not my
that's not my job. I mean, you got JD
Vance is the vice president and Marco
Rubio. That would be, for example, a
great ticket
>> with who at the top of the ticket?
>> JD would be there, but Marco's already
said that if JD runs, he he wouldn't
wouldn't challenge him. I love these
guys. These are
I always admired Marco back in 2016. I
always thought he was like of the of the
people on that stage, the 16
Republicans, I always thought he was the
sharpest tool in the shed besides Donald
Trump, right? He he didn't he couldn't
hold a candle to Trump with respect to
everything. But he's really a very
capable person. But let me let I think
you're on to something here with the
messaging because the people on your
side of the the the Atlantic are going
to be watching that election for
Congress very carefully because what
happened in 2018 because we lost the
house. I write about that in my book.
There were some mistakes made that I
hope we don't make again. Um it became
uh
let's say a crap show. That's a little
easier way of saying it because the
Democrats just started issuing subpoenas
and impeachments and all that. Bro, we
don't want to repeat that. But, but
here's what we're up against. It's like
we come in and we got egg prices off the
charts and we got beef prices off the
charts. Okay, it's like that's terrible.
It's like that's as American as you can.
Scrambled eggs and hamburgers, right? So
with eggs, we've been able to
dramatically reduce the price of eggs
almost immediately. How did we get
there? This is really interesting how
how politics works here. It's like the
Democrats come in and with chickens,
they kill 80 million chickens.
Literally, Joe Biden slaughters 80
million chickens because he overreacts
to an aven flu thing. At the same time,
with beef, he reduces grazing land.
>> Dr. questions about your policy, aren't
they? You mentioned beef, and I'm
conscious of the fact that President
Trump reduced uh tariffs on beef,
tomatoes, coffee, and bananas. Exactly.
Because of the pressures on the
household budgets of ordinary Americans.
So, that's an acknowledgement, isn't it,
that some of the actions the
administration has taken, including on
tariffs, of which you are the architect,
they have played a role in hurting
ordinary Americans. I'm totally
supportive of no tariffs on products we
don't make here. We don't make coffee
here.
>> So why
>> made no sense?
It it happened and now we we make
adjustments. That's what we do. We we
make adjustments. But if you look at the
economics of that or elasticities of
supply and demand, it's like we don't
make coffee, right? So we don't make
chocolate. So we lower the the price on
that. In the short run, we can we can
import a little little beef. But we just
had oil drop below $60 a barrel, which
is where it was when we left office the
first term for Trump. Okay. Biden jacked
that price up to about $75.
And so what that does, it not only
increases cost of heating your home and
driving your car, it increases the cost
of fertilizer
for crops. So food prices go up. It
increases the cost of transportation for
food.
>> Manufacturing jobs have declined for
seven straight months.
>> Well, let's shift to that. Let's let's
think about that. Okay, that's my job.
I'm the senior counselor for trade
manufacturing. How long? How long How
long do you think it's going to How
long?
>> Let me I can tell you I can tell you
that with exactitude. Okay,
>> here's how it works.
>> No, how long is it going to take for you
to be able
>> Well, let me let me just work you
through the quick math. For you to have
a new factory in this country ready to
produce things and therefore have new
manufacturing jobs, that's about two to
three years.
Now, what you see in the interim is is
this. We're having literally trillions
of dollars of investment come in from
abroad as well as domestically
which is as we speak beginning to design
those factories and get ready to build
them. Now what happens then? You have a
boom in construction jobs. That's the
first phase of that. But you won't see
any improvement in manufacturing right
then. But then once you build the
factories, that's when you see the
manufacturing jobs. So Rome wasn't built
in the day. China took us took it's
going on 25 years now where they've
taken us apart. It's not just the
factories. They took they took our
supply chains. And we can't like wave a
magic wand. It doesn't work like that.
But if you simply look at the
trajectory,
it's going to be a beautiful thing. Do
you think it's going to be enough of a
message to be saying to Americans in the
run-up to the midterm, it's a work in
progress. The Democrats left us a really
bad inheritance. Don't you think you
might have to do more?
>> We are doing more. I can't I can assure
you.
>> Let me let me give you one concrete
thing. Would what about what about
increasing taxes on the wealthiest like
a 40% tax rate? That's something Steve
Bannon, who you know well, is in favor
of. Would you support it?
>> I I supported that back in the first
term. It's a it's a it's a debatable
issue, but I I'm Look, I always trust
>> in the president. He's playing
three-dimensional chess, and I it's like
you can you can you can have points of
view. It's you win some, you lose some,
but I always trust his judgment. Now,
you're pulling that kind of out of left
field. The thing that we have to do here
in in terms of the midterms is first of
all explain to people exactly what we're
doing across the different areas where
we have problems with inflation which is
the the housing, the health care costs,
food, energy. Those are the those are
the biggies. And we are as we speak
working 24 hours a day on things we can
do to make that better. Okay. And I go
let me give you an example. [snorts]
And this is this the second thing we
always have to do is rhyme peel how we
got here because it's a Democrat
>> you've you've talked about that already.
So, you've got the Supreme Court case
verdict coming up soon, which a lot of
people are preparing for it to go
against the government based on the
comments that the justices, including
John Roberts, made during questioning.
>> What happens if the government loses the
case? What is the plan B?
>> Let's start with the case itself. The
case is about whether you can use the
emergency powers of the president to
impose terrorism.
>> And it was your advice that he could.
You you you were clear that this was the
way the EA this was the act.
>> Yes. If the Supreme Court wants to uh
essentially ratify the president's use
of tariffs under the law is on its side
and our side. And the law is simply
this. There's two two salient points for
your viewers. One is a question of
whether a tariff is a tax. And in this
context, in an emergency context, it's
absolutely not.
>> Okay.
>> Tariffs, tax, what if the Supreme Court
takes a different revenues are
incidental. Now, the other
>> this is the argument that the
government's always the other issue is
is a language issue is whether tariffs
are a legitimate form of import
restriction. And of course, they are.
So, the the Supreme Court has has the
ability. Now with respect to plan B,
whatever plan B is will not be as good
as plan A. So we have to recognize that
this
>> will also be expensive, won't it?
Because
>> Dr. R, lots of companies will have to be
compensated, won't they, for tariffs,
depends on what the refunded for the
tariffs they were charged.
>> Let's not go there until we have to go
there. I mean, I'm very confident that
that we have a a a very very good
chance. I mean, the law is on our side.
the law is on our side here. So, let's
win that. Now, if we don't win, there's
there's the whole alphabet number soup
of things we've got. We've got the
section 232s, which which we are using
aggressively already on things like
steel and aluminum, uh on lumber, on
critical minerals, on pharmaceuticals.
We have that. We have the 301 section
which we used on China to impose tariffs
which we can do on any country in the
world that's cheating us.
>> But if this case goes against you, it
will affect your standing, won't it, in
the White House because you were the one
who was convinced that this route was
the right one to go down with the bulk
of tariff policy. Would you consider
resigning if the case is lost? Oh,
>> of course not. That's silly. I mean, and
why it's like I'm part of a trade team.
We've got Scott Bessett as the Treasury
Secretary, Howard Leutnik as the
commerce secretary, Jameus Greer as the
United States trade representative and
myself with JD Vance weighing in and the
only person who matters is President
Trump. Okay. So we are proceeding as uh
the vision uh of how to go about this uh
was crafted uh not by me but by by a
group of people. We're doing exactly
what we should be doing. We've
anticipated contingencies.
Uh but we think that the most thing
important thing to do now is focus on on
winning that case at the Supreme Court.
That's where we're at. If we lose, then
we we have a plan B. It's not for me to
talk about that to the world because I
don't think we're going to lose. But if
we do, we we are certainly prepared.
>> Imagine the refund bill, which some are
saying could be as much as hundred
billion dollars.
>> I think you're basically making the case
why what we've done is a very good
thing. I mean, think about it. We
inherited from the Democrats who spent
money, as we say, on this side of the
pond, like drunken sailors. Okay? just
totally fiscally irresponsible, like
crazy stuff. And we were looking when we
we got into office at a fiscal cliff
that was going to crush us with higher
interest rates, inability to finance it.
And and this tariff revenue, if you just
cost it out, is the difference between a
dangerous deficit and a healthy payown
in our debt. We're coming towards
towards the end of the conversation and
I quite often ask people u what they do
at the weekends and I'm conscious like
what are your weekends like work
>> work when you're look it's like when
you're in when you're working for the
White House it's it's like being at sea
or being on deployment for the military
you're working every day and I know
better than most because I remember the
last day from the first term and it was
like you know you're leaving and wow
there some stuff we left on the table we
could have or should have got done and
we didn't. And I try to tell people who
are there, it's like, look, uh, the
clock's ticking
>> and we got a lot of work to do for the
American people. Spend
as much time as you can without it
influencing or harming your family time.
But this job is not a job. It's not a
job. It's a mission. I mean, there's no
I mean, I don't It's like if this were
just a job, I wouldn't be doing it
because I'm I'm at the retirement age
and I could just as easily be working on
my next book or whatever.
>> Some of the White House team are in
glossy photo shoots for Vanity Fair.
What did you do?
>> You know that that that funny you
mentioned that. Go to that Vanity Fair
article and look at everybody they took
a picture of. And every one of those
persons and pictures looks demonic.
Demonic. They frame those pictures in a
way to to have you hate those people.
And that's despicable. That Vanity Fair
thing is a very sophisticated form of
propaganda. It's basically the triumph
of fear over fact. And the the guy who
wrote it, Chris Whipple, shame on him.
He was once
a fairly good author. He's turned into a
Trump derangement syndrome guy. And
>> all the [clears throat] quotes are on
the record and they're all on.
>> Well, I would challenge that as well.
Just go look at those pictures. I mean,
Caroline Levit, the way they did, it's
like they went in and airbrushed that
thing in a way which I mean, it's just
it's brutal what they do.
>> Is that really what you're taking away
from it? What I was putting to you is
that there are they're taking the time
to be in a Vanity Fair photo shoot.
You're talking about mission and you
weren't in that photo shoot.
>> No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Like
every one of those people in that
article works uh twice as much as
anybody, you know, okay? They're working
nonstop and the pressure is is is hard.
I mean, stuff happens like on any given
day, stuff happens that you got to
figure out and it's you got to be quick
on your feet. You got to be able to do
the right thing. And I'm just saying
that that Vanity Fair article, it's just
a study in propaganda.
>> Peter Navaro, thank you very much for
talking to us.
>> It's been a pleasure.
>> [music]